---
layout: post
title: Becoming A Data Scientist
photo_url: "/images/swirl.JPG"
tag:
- thoughts
---


What is data science? A buzzword with meanings as varied as butterflies.  If you flip through the job description of data scientists, they all require similar skill sets, and seemingly want the same group of people, but it is still unclear what is expected exactly.  I'm fortunate enough to work in this area, and experienced the transition from statisticians to data scientists.  Recently graduated and will start to work as a data scientist soon, I decide to put down pieces of thoughts about this sexy job in an organized manner.  Hope my personal opinion of the constant battle between statisticians and computer scientists, and my personal experience of working as a data scientist, can be a little help if you want to work as a data scientist.  


By definition, data science is the union or intersection of statistics, computer science, and domain knowledge. Since I'm writing from the perspective of a statistician, I constantly ask myself is that any different from the job of an old fashion statistician?  Conceptually, there is not anything new.  The famous paper 'Future of data analysis' published half a century ago by John Tukey, emphasized all three components.  Statistics by nature a interdisciplinary study area, in application and in research. Theories are important and are the very foundation of the data analysis.  But, theories are limited.  The application of theories on convenient assumptions that neglect the imperfect reality of the subject may get misleading results.  Insights of the domain subject defines the direction of the analysis, also advances the development of future researches.  Other than domain knowledge, computing is another aspect that Dr. Tukey tried hard to emphasize. He sometimes refer to it as practicality.  'If data analysis is to be helpful and useful, it must be practiced. '  With that being said, what is expected are engineers, who have the capability to build something that takes the data as the raw material, and provides the results as the product.  A statistician work in industry must be able to comfortably perform the beautiful, instant transformation between the statistician/mathematician and the engineering/programmer. 

Since the road map has been laid out half a century ago, is data science really an old gift in a new wrapper?  Based on my understanding, it is new, because every challenge we face on a daily basis is unique by nature.  They are still awaiting new methodologies, technologies, and smart people with the necessary skill set.  It is a long way to go from acknowledging the challenge of computing to fully conquer this field.  

The concept of data science exists years ago, but a new rad name helps a lot.  As human being, we can not escape from our human nature that we are drawn to the novelty.  Thanks to this name, data science draw a lot attention from the whole society.  In contrast to statistics, which has not changed for ages, buzzwords in computer science keeps popping up every few years, machine learning, data mining, neural network, deep learning, ....  This can be a very long list.  Interestingly, the word data science was proposed as early as 1998, by Dr. Jeff Wu, a professor in the statistics department at Michigan university in his inaugural speech.  However, we statisticians did not use it back then, and lost our chance to claim ownership to a great name. 



The battle between statisticians and computer scientists is still on going, and probably will not come to an ceasefire in the foreseeable future.  They way I see it, is the constant struggle between the beautiful complex models and what can be practically implemented.  As Tukey mentioned before, practicality is an obstacle statisticians have to over come.  From the perspective of a statistician, this obstacle includes data manipulation and building stable robust models.  The tedious process of data cleaning and data organization is a crucial part of the job.  It is a conceptually easy job, but not that easy to get done correctly.  A lot of patienc and meticulousness are required.  I once read an argument made by human resources bloggers that having data scientists spend tons of time organization and manipulating the data is a waste.  I disagree.  Not only running the model need organized data the format of which only data scientists are familiar of, but interesting insights of the problem comes from exploring the data set.  Especially when the data is big and complex, some interesting and important facts and special cases might not come up without meticulous data organization.  Moreover, this is the area that statistics students need might show weakness comparing to computer science students, who have a good understanding of databases, and are proficient at massaging the data.  The next step, building stable and robust models should be of more fun.  However, to make it solid is not easy.  It is often the case that the data breaks the very assumption that the models are built upon.  If the model built gets run in a system over and over again using updated data set, more challenge come with corner cases and heterogeneity.  This is when the intuitive and practical methods proposed by computer scientists swoops in.  To work as a data scientist with a background in statistics, we need to have solid knowledge of statistical inference, modeling, and algorithmic knowledge, which serves the foundation for understanding in what cases models work or break.  On top of that, we need to get familiar with the practical tools in computer science that has been proven to be useful with massive empirical experiences.



In the job market, you may find two types of data scientist jobs, depending on how the analysis results are used.  The first type of data scientists produce results that talk to the machines.  A major employer is the online advertising industry.  The second kind of data scientists produces results that communicate to human beings.  Although the two types of data scientists sound dramatically different, they require very similar skill sets, except the former emphasizes solid coding skills while the latter requires good interpersonal skills.  It is probably hard to identify which type it is based on the job description, but you will have a clear answer after the phone interview.  If your goal of life is to build a successful career, I believe the two types of data scientist jobs are merely two path that leads to the same destination.  To land a data scientist job, the very basic requirement is solid statistical background, which can be acquired from course work, research experiences, and constant self learning.  On top of that, it is crucial to demonstrate the capability of connecting the messy massive data with the theories, and make use of both to solve the problems that concerns the business.  The domain knowledge and the interpersonal skills determines how far you can go down this career path.  It is not easy to crunch the numbers, but the time and efforts invested will guarantee some useful results in return;  it is much harder to deal with those parts in the job that does not involve data, and constant self-learning and experience are needed to master this part. 
